        _Poor Richard_
        1745

        _Courteous Reader_,
        For the Benefit of the Publick, and my own Profit, I have
performed this my thirteenth annual Labour, which I hope will be as
acceptable as the former.

        The rising and setting of the Planets, and their Conjunctions
with the Moon, I have continued; whereby those who are unacquainted
with those heavenly Bodies, may soon learn to distinguish them from
the fixed Stars, by observing the following Directions.

        All those glittering Stars (except five) which we see in the
Firmament of Heaven, are called fixed Stars, because they keep the
same Distance from one another, and from the Ecliptic; they rise and
set on the same Points of the Horizon, and appear like so many lucid
Points fixed to the celestial Firmament.  The other five have a
particular and different Motion, for which Reason they have not
always the same Distance form one another; and therefore they have
been called wandering Stars or Planets, _viz. Saturn_ xxx, _Jupiter_
xxx, _Mars_ xxx, _Venus_ xxx, and _Mercury_ xxx, and these may be
distinguished from the fixed Stars by their not twinkling.  The
brightest of the five is _Venus_, which appears the biggest; and when
this glorious Star appears, and goes before the Sun, it is called
_Phosphorus_, or the Morning-Star, and _Hesperus_, or the
Evening-Star, when it follows the Sun.  _Jupiter_ appears almost as
big as _Venus_, but not so bright.  _Mars_ may be easily known from
the rest of the Planets, because it appears red like a hot Iron or
burning Coal, and twinkles a little.  _Saturn_, in Appearance, is
less than _Mars_, and of a pale Colour, _Mercury_ is so near the Sun,
that it is seldom seen.

        Against the 6th Day of _January_ you may see xxx rise 10 35,
which signifies the Planet _Mars_ rises 35 Minutes after 10 o' Clock
at Night, when that Planet may be seen to appear in the East.  Also
against the 10th Day of _January_ you will find xxx sets 7 13, which
shows _Venus_ sets 13 Minutes after 7 o'Clock at Night.  If you look
towards the West that Evening, you may see that beautiful Star till
the Time of its setting.  Again, on the 18th Day of the same Month,
you will find xxx rise 9 18, which shews that _Saturn_ rises 18
Minutes after 9 at Night.

        Or the Planets may be known by observing them at the Time of
their Conjunctions with the Moon, _viz._ against the 14 Day of
_January_ are inserted these Characters, xxx, which shews there will
be a Conjunction of the Moon and _Saturn_ on that Day.  If you look
out about 5 o' Clock in the Morning, you will see _Saturn_ very near
the Moon.  The like is to be observed at any other time by the rising
and setting of the Planets, and their Conjunctions with the Moon; by
which Method they may be distinctly known from the fixed Stars.

        I have nothing further to add at present, but my hearty Wishes
for your Welfare, both temporal and spiritual, and Thanks for all
your past Favours, being,
                                 _Dear Reader_,
                                           _Thy obliged Friend_,
                                           R. SAUNDERS.
                                           -----------

        Beware of little Expences, a small Leak will sink a great Ship.

        Wars bring scars.

        A light purse is a heavy Curse.

        As often as we do good, we sacrifice.

        Help, Hands;
        For I have no Lands.

        It's common for Men to give 6 pretended Reasons instead of one
real one.

        _Vanity_ backbites more than _Malice._

        He's a Fool that cannot conceal his Wisdom.

        Great spenders are bad lenders.

        All blood is alike ancient.

        You may talk too much on the best of subjects.

        A Man without ceremony has need of great merit in its place.

        No gains without pains.

        Had I revenged wrong, I had not worn my skirts so long.

        Graft good Fruit all, or graft not at all.

        Idleness is the greatest Prodigality.

        Old young and old long.

        Punch-coal, cut-candle, and set brand on end,
        is neither good house wife, nor good house-wife's friend.

        He who buys had need have 100 Eyes,
        but one's enough for him that sells the Stuff.

        There are no fools so troublesome as those that have wit.


        Many complain of their Memory, few of their Judgment.

        One Man may be more cunning than another, but not more cunning
than every body else.

        To God we owe fear and love; to our neighbours justice and
charity; to our selves prudence and sobriety.

        Fools make feasts and wise men eat them.

        Light-heel'd mothers make leaden-heel'd daughters.

        The good or ill hap of a good or ill life,
        is the good or ill choice of a good or ill wife.

        Tis easier to prevent bad habits than to break them.

        Every Man has Assurance enough to boast of his honesty, few of
their Understanding.

        Interest which blinds some People, enlightens others.

        An ounce of wit that is bought,
        Is worth a pound that is taught.

        He that resolves to mend hereafter, resolves not to mend now.


.
