        _Poor Richard Improved_
        1753

        COURTEOUS READER,
        This is the twentieth Time of my addressing thee in this
Manner, and I have reason to flatter myself my Labours have not been
unacceptable to the Publick.  I am particularly pleas'd to understand
that my _Predictions of the Weather_ give such general Satisfaction;
and indeed, such Care is taken in the Calculations, on which those
Predictions are founded, that I could almost venture to say, there's
not a single One of them, promising _Snow_, _Rain_, _Hail_, _Heat_,
_Frost_, _Fogs_, _Wind_, or _Thunder_, but what comes to pass
_punctually_ and _precisely_ on the very Day, in some Place or other
on this little _diminutive_ Globe of ours; (and when you consider the
vast Distance of the Stars from whence we take our Aim, you must
allow it no small Degree of Exactness to hit any Part of it) I say on
this Globe; for tho' in other Matters I confine the Usefulness of my
_Ephemeris_ to the _Northern Colonies_, yet in that important Matter
of the Weather, which is of such _general Concern_, I would have it
more extensively useful, and therefore take in both Hemispheres, and
all Latitudes from _Hudson's Bay_ to _Cape Horn._

        You will find this Almanack in my former Method, only
conformable to the _New-Stile_ established by the Act of Parliament,
which I gave you in my last at length; the new Act since made for
Amendment of that first Act, not affecting us in the least, being
intended only to regulate some Corporation Matters in _England_,
before unprovided for.  I have only added a Column in the second Page
of each Month, containing the Days of the _Old Stile_ opposite to
their corresponding Days in the _New_, which may, in many Cases, be
of Use; and so conclude (believing you will excuse a short Preface,
when it is to make Room for something better)
                                         _Thy Friend and Servant,_
                                                 R. SAUNDERS.
                                 ______

        'Tis against some Mens Principle to pay Interest, and seems
against others Interest to pay the Principal.

        Philosophy as well as Foppery often changes Fashion.

        Setting too good an Example is a Kind of Slander seldom
forgiven; 'tis _Scandalum Magnatum._

        A great Talker may be no Fool, but he is one that relies on
him.

        When Reason preaches, if you won't hear her she'll box your
Ears.

        It is not Leisure that is not used.

        The Good-will of the Governed will be starv'd, if not fed by
the good Deeds of the Governors.

        Paintings and Fightings are best seen at a distance.

        If you would reap Praise you must sow the Seeds,
        Gentle Words and useful Deeds.

        _Ignorance_ leads Men into a Party, and _Shame_ keeps them from
getting out again.

        Haste makes Waste.

        Many have quarrel'd about Religion, that never practis'd it.

        _Sudden Power_ is apt to be insolent, _Sudden Liberty_ saucy;
that behaves best which has grown gradually.

        He that best understands the World, least likes it.

        _Anger_ is never without a Reason, but seldom with a good One.

        He that is of Opinion Money will do every Thing, may well be
suspected of doing every Thing for Money.

        An ill Wound, but not an ill Name, may be healed.

        When out of Favour, none know thee; when in, thou dost not know
thyself.

        A lean Award is better than a fat Judgment.

        _God_, _Parents_, and _Instructors_, can never be requited.

        He that builds before he counts the Cost, acts foolishly; and
he that counts before he builds, finds he did not count wisely.

        _Patience_ in Market, is worth Pounds in a Year.

        Danger is Sauce for Prayers.

        If you have no Honey in your Pot, have some in your Mouth.

        A Pair of good Ears will drain dry an hundred Tongues.

        Serving God is Doing Good to Man, but Praying is thought an
easier Service, and therefore more generally chosen.

        Nothing humbler than _Ambition_, when it is about to climb.

        The discontented Man finds no easy Chair.

        Virtue and a Trade, are a Child's best Portion.

        Gifts much expected, are _paid_, not _given._
                                 ______

        _How to secure Houses,_ &c. _from_ LIGHTNING.

         It has pleased God in his Goodness to Mankind, at length to
discover to them the Means of securing their Habitations and other
Buildings from Mischief by Thunder and Lightning.  The Method is
this: Provide a small Iron Rod (it may be made of the Rod-iron used
by the Nailers) but of such a Length, that one End being three or
four Feet in the moist Ground, the other may be six or eight Feet
above the highest Part of the Building.  To the upper End of the Rod
fasten about a Foot of Brass Wire, the Size of a common
Knitting-needle, sharpened to a fine Point; the Rod may be secured to
the House by a few small Staples.  If the House or Barn be long,
there may be a Rod and Point at each End, and a middling Wire along
the Ridge from one to the other.  A House thus furnished will not be
damaged by Lightning, it being attracted by the Points, and passing
thro the Metal into the Ground without hurting any Thing.  Vessels
also, having a sharp pointed Rod fix'd on the Top of their Masts,
with a Wire from the Foot of the Rod reaching down, round one of the
Shrouds, to the Water, will not be hurt by Lightning.


.
